docs/ug/en/appendix/alternative_provers.rst, before:

.. _Alternative_Provers:

Alternative Provers
===================

Installed with |SPARK| Pro
--------------------------

The provers Alt-Ergo, CVC4 and Z3 are installed with the |SPARK| tool. By
default, |GNATprove| uses prover CVC4 only. Switch ``--level`` changes the
default to use one or more provers depending on the chosen level (see
:ref:`Running GNATprove from the Command Line`). Switch ``--prover`` allows to
use another prover, or a list of provers. Prover names ``altergo``, ``cvc4``
and ``z3`` are used to refer to the versions of provers Alt-Ergo, CVC4 and Z3
that are installed with the |SPARK| toolset. The string ``alt-ergo`` can also
be used to refer to Alt-Ergo. More information on Alt-Ergo, CVC4 and Z3 can be
found on their respective websites:

 * Alt-Ergo: https://alt-ergo.ocamlpro.com
 * CVC4: http://cvc4.cs.stanford.edu/web/
 * Z3: https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3

Installed with |SPARK| Discovery
--------------------------------

In this case, only prover Alt-Ergo is installed with the |SPARK| tool. Hence,
by default |GNATprove| only uses prover Alt-Ergo. In particular, switch
``--level`` has no impact on the use of different provers.

Installed with |SPARK| Community
--------------------------------

The provers Alt-Ergo, CVC4 and Z3 are installed with the |SPARK| tool.

Other Automatic or Manual Provers
---------------------------------

Updating the Why3 Configuration File
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

|GNATprove| can call other provers, as long as they are supported by the Why3
platform (see complete list on `Why3 webpage
<http://why3.lri.fr/#provers>`_). To use another prover, it must be listed in
your Why3 configuration file.

To create or update automatically a Why3 configuration file, call the command
``<spark2014-install>/libexec/spark/bin/why3config --detect-provers``. It
searches your ``PATH`` for any supported provers and adds them to the default
configuration file ``.why3.conf`` in your ``HOME``, or a configuration file
given in argument with switch ``-C <file>``.  This file consists of a few
general settings and a section for each prover which is supported.

|GNATprove| reads the default configuration file ``.why3.conf`` in your
``HOME``, or the configuration file given in argument with switch
``--why3-conf=<file>``. Any prover name configured in this configuration file
can be used as an argument to switch ``--prover``.

Note that using this mechanism, you cannot replace the definitions provided
with the SPARK tools for the provers ``altergo``, ``cvc4`` and ``z3``.

If more than one prover is specified, the provers are tried in order on each
VC, until one of them succeeds or all fail. Interactive provers cannot be
combined with other provers, so must appear on their own.

Sharing Libraries of Theorems
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When |GNATprove| is used with a manual prover, the user can provide libraries
of theorems to use during the proof process.

To do so, the user will need to set a proof directory (see :ref:`Project
Attributes` for more details on this directory).  The user needs to create a
folder with the same name as the chosen manual prover (the casing of the name
is the same as the one passed to the switch ``--prover``) and put the library
sources inside this folder.

Finally, some additional fields need to be added to the prover configuration
in the Why3 configuration file (a basic example of prover configuration can
be found in the section on :ref:`Coq`):

* ``configure_build``: this field allows you to specify a command to configure
  the compilation of the library of theorems. This command will be called each
  time a source file is added to the library.

* ``build_commands``: this field allows you to specify a set of command which
  will be called sequentially to build your library. These commands will be
  called each time |GNATprove| runs the corresponding manual prover.
  (In order to define multiple commands for this field, just set the field
  multiple times with different values, each time the field is set it adds a
  new element to the set of ``build_commands``).

Inside these commands, pattern ``%f`` refers to the name of the library file
considered, and ``%o`` to the name of the main ``gnatprove`` repository
generated by |GNATprove|. This allows referring to the path of the compiled
library of theorems inside these commands with ``%o/user/<prover_name>``.

.. _Coq:

Coq
---

``gnatprove`` has support for the Coq interactive prover, even though Coq is
not part of the |SPARK| distribution. If you want to use Coq with |SPARK|, you
need to install it yourself on your system and put it in your ``PATH``
environment variable. Then, you can simply provide ``--prover=coq`` to
``gnatprove``. Note that the only supported version currently is Coq 8.5.

Commit message:

S517-001 implement --prover=all switch
Support for --prover=all. It is equivalent to
--prover=cvc4,z3,alt-ergo in SPARK Pro and --prover=alt-ergo in
SPARK Discovery.

* configuration.adb
(Set_Provers): if argument of --prover is set to "all", do not
attempt to parse it as a prover name, instead add the built-in
provers to the list of provers, if available.

Change-Id: Ifde04807f31d85b7e331777b06e5544e8ad468f2

docs/ug/en/appendix/alternative_provers.rst, after:

.. _Alternative_Provers:

Alternative Provers
===================

Installed with |SPARK| Pro
--------------------------

The provers Alt-Ergo, CVC4 and Z3 are installed with the |SPARK| tool. By
default, |GNATprove| uses prover CVC4 only. Switch ``--level`` changes the
default to use one or more provers depending on the chosen level (see
:ref:`Running GNATprove from the Command Line`). Switch ``--prover`` allows to
use another prover, or a list of provers. Prover names ``altergo``, ``cvc4``
and ``z3`` are used to refer to the versions of provers Alt-Ergo, CVC4 and Z3
that are installed with the |SPARK| toolset. The string ``alt-ergo`` can also
be used to refer to Alt-Ergo. Using the switch ``--prover=all``, one can select
all three built-in provers, in the order ``cvc4, z3, altergo``. More information
on Alt-Ergo, CVC4 and Z3 can be found on their respective websites:

 * Alt-Ergo: https://alt-ergo.ocamlpro.com
 * CVC4: http://cvc4.cs.stanford.edu/web/
 * Z3: https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3

Installed with |SPARK| Discovery
--------------------------------

In this case, only prover Alt-Ergo is installed with the |SPARK| tool. Hence,
by default |GNATprove| only uses prover Alt-Ergo. In particular, switch
``--level`` has no impact on the use of different provers, and ``--prover=all``
will only select Alt-Ergo.

Installed with |SPARK| Community
--------------------------------

The provers Alt-Ergo, CVC4 and Z3 are installed with the |SPARK| tool.

Other Automatic or Manual Provers
---------------------------------

Updating the Why3 Configuration File
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

|GNATprove| can call other provers, as long as they are supported by the Why3
platform (see complete list on `Why3 webpage
<http://why3.lri.fr/#provers>`_). To use another prover, it must be listed in
your Why3 configuration file.

To create or update automatically a Why3 configuration file, call the command
``<spark2014-install>/libexec/spark/bin/why3config --detect-provers``. It
searches your ``PATH`` for any supported provers and adds them to the default
configuration file ``.why3.conf`` in your ``HOME``, or a configuration file
given in argument with switch ``-C <file>``.  This file consists of a few
general settings and a section for each prover which is supported.

|GNATprove| reads the default configuration file ``.why3.conf`` in your
``HOME``, or the configuration file given in argument with switch
``--why3-conf=<file>``. Any prover name configured in this configuration file
can be used as an argument to switch ``--prover``.

Note that using this mechanism, you cannot replace the definitions provided
with the SPARK tools for the provers ``altergo``, ``cvc4`` and ``z3``.

If more than one prover is specified, the provers are tried in order on each
VC, until one of them succeeds or all fail. Interactive provers cannot be
combined with other provers, so must appear on their own.

Sharing Libraries of Theorems
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When |GNATprove| is used with a manual prover, the user can provide libraries
of theorems to use during the proof process.

To do so, the user will need to set a proof directory (see :ref:`Project
Attributes` for more details on this directory).  The user needs to create a
folder with the same name as the chosen manual prover (the casing of the name
is the same as the one passed to the switch ``--prover``) and put the library
sources inside this folder.

Finally, some additional fields need to be added to the prover configuration
in the Why3 configuration file (a basic example of prover configuration can
be found in the section on :ref:`Coq`):

* ``configure_build``: this field allows you to specify a command to configure
  the compilation of the library of theorems. This command will be called each
  time a source file is added to the library.

* ``build_commands``: this field allows you to specify a set of command which
  will be called sequentially to build your library. These commands will be
  called each time |GNATprove| runs the corresponding manual prover.
  (In order to define multiple commands for this field, just set the field
  multiple times with different values, each time the field is set it adds a
  new element to the set of ``build_commands``).

Inside these commands, pattern ``%f`` refers to the name of the library file
considered, and ``%o`` to the name of the main ``gnatprove`` repository
generated by |GNATprove|. This allows referring to the path of the compiled
library of theorems inside these commands with ``%o/user/<prover_name>``.

.. _Coq:

Coq
---

``gnatprove`` has support for the Coq interactive prover, even though Coq is
not part of the |SPARK| distribution. If you want to use Coq with |SPARK|, you
need to install it yourself on your system and put it in your ``PATH``
environment variable. Then, you can simply provide ``--prover=coq`` to
``gnatprove``. Note that the only supported version currently is Coq 8.5.
