docs/ug/en/appendix/gnatprove_limitations.rst, before:

.. _GNATprove_Limitations:

|GNATprove| Limitations
=======================

.. _Tool Limitations:

Tool Limitations
----------------

#. The Global contracts generated automatically by |GNATprove| for subprograms
   without an explicit one do not take into account indirect calls (through
   access-to-subprogram and dynamic binding) and indirect reads/writes to
   global variables (through access variables).

#. Checks related to tasking, subprogram termination, or recursive calls do not
   take into account dispatching calls.

#. A subset of all Ada conversions between array types is supported:

   * element types must be exactly the same
   * matching index types must either be both modular with a base type of the
     same size, or both non modular

#. A subset of all Ada fixed-point types and fixed-point operations is
   supported:

   * multiplication and division between different fixed-point types and
     floating-point types are rejected
   * multiplication and division between a fixed-point type and a real literal
     are rejected, the fix is to qualify the real literal with a fixed-point
     type as in ``Fp_Type'(0.25)``
   * multiplication and division between different fixed-point types are
     rejected if their smalls are not *compatible* as defined in Ada RM
     G.2.3(21)
   * conversions from fixed-point types to floating-point types are rejected

   These restrictions ensure that the result of fixed-point operations always
   belongs to the *perfect result set* as defined in Ada RM G.2.3.

#. Multidimensional array types are supported up to 4 dimensions.

#. Loop_Invariant and Loop_Variant pragmas must appear before any non-scalar
   object declaration.

#. Inheriting the same subprogram from multiple interfaces is not supported.

#. Formal object parameters of generics of an unconstrained record type with
   per-object constrained fields are badly supported by the tool and may
   result in crashes in some cases.

#. Quantified expressions with an iterator over a multi dimensional array (for
   example ``for all Elem of Arr`` where ``Arr`` is a multi dimensional array)
   are not supported.

#. Constrained subtypes of class-wide types and 'Class attributes of
   constrained record types are not supported.

#. Abstract states cannot be marked ``Part_Of`` a single concurrent object (see
   |SPARK| RM 9(3)). An error is raised instead in such cases.

#. Classwide Global and Depends contracts as defined in SPARK RM 6.1.6 are not
   supported.

#. Task attributes Identity and Storage_Size are not supported.

#. Type_Invariant and Invariant aspects are not supported:

   * on private types declared in nested packages or child packages
   * on protected types
   * on tagged types
   * on components of tagged types if the tagged type is visible from inside the
     scope of the invariant bearing type.

#. Calls to protected subprograms and protected entries whose prefix denotes a
   formal subprogram parameter are not supported. Similarly, suspension on
   suspension objects given as formal subprogram parameters is not supported.

Legality Rules
--------------

#. |SPARK| Reference Manual rule 4.3(1), concerning use of the box
   symbol "<>" in aggregates, is not currently checked.

#. The rule concerned with asserting that all child packages which
   have state denoted as being Part_Of a more visible state
   abstraction are given as constituents in the refinement of the more
   visible state is not checked (|SPARK| Reference Manual rule
   7.2.6(6)).

#. The case of a state abstraction whose Part_Of aspect denotes a
   task or protected unit is not currently supported.

#. The case of a Refined_Post specification for a (protected) entry
   is not currently supported.

#. The use of Ada.Synchronous_Barriers.Synchronous_Barrier type is not currently
   allowed in |SPARK|.

#. Entry families are not currently allowed in |SPARK|.

Flow Analysis Limitations
-------------------------

#. Flow dependencies caused by record assignments is not captured with perfect
   accuracy. This means that the value of one field might incorrectly be
   considered to participate in the derivation of another field that it does
   not really participate in.

#. Initialization of multi-dimensional arrays with nested FOR loops can be only
   detected if the array bounds are given by static expressions.

Proof Limitations
-----------------

#. Postconditions of recursive functions called in contracts and assertion
   pragmas are not available, possibly leading to unproved checks. The current
   workaround is to use a non-recursive wrapper around those functions. Using
   the switch ``--info`` reveals where the information about postcondition may
   be lost.

#. Attribute 'Valid is currently assumed to always return True.

#. Values read from an external source are assumed to be valid values.
   Currently there is no model of invalidity or undefinedness. The onus
   is on the user to ensure that all values read from an external source are
   valid. The use of an invalid value invalidates any proofs associated with
   the value.

#. The following attributes are not yet supported in proof: Adjacent, Aft,
   Bit_Order, Body_Version, Copy_Sign, Definite, Denorm, First_Valid, Fore,
   Last_Valid, Machine, all Machine_* attributes, Model, all Model_* attributes,
   Partition_Id, Remainder, Round, Safe_First, Safe_Last, Scale, Scaling, Small,
   Unbiased_Rounding, Version, Wide_Image, Wide_Value, Wide_Width,
   Wide_Wide_Image, Wide_Wide_Value, Wide_Wide_Width, Width.

   The attributes First_Bit, Last_Bit and Position are supported but if there is
   no record representation clause then we assume that their value is
   nonnegative.

#. The 'Update attribute on multidimensional unconstrained arrays is not
   yet fully supported in proof. Checks might be missing so currently an
   error is emitted for any use of the 'Update attribute on
   multidimensional unconstrained arrays.

#. |GNATprove| does not follow the value of tags for tagged objects. As a
   consequence, tag checks are currently unprovable in most cases.

#. Constants declared in loops before the loop invariant are handled as
   variables by the tool. This means in particular that any information
   about their values needed after the loop invariant must be stated explicitly
   in the loop invariant.

#. Preconditions on arithmetic and conversion operators (including Time_Of) in
   Ada.Execution_Time and Ada.Real_Time packages described in |SPARK| Reference
   Manual 9.19 are not yet implemented.

#. Preconditions on arithmetic and conversion operators (including Time_Of) in
   Ada.Calendar package are not yet implemented.

Commit message:

S701-026 Add index to SPARK User's Guide
Add an index to the SPARK User's Guide. When multiple entries share the same
key in the index, qualify all but one (at most) with a context as in:

.. index:: precondition; example of use

Also use "pair" for mutual contexts between two keys, and "see" for
indirection between keys.

For details of the syntax and possibilities, see:
https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/directives.html

* rst files
Add index entries.

* examples/tests/addition_bignum
New example to remove use of -gnato13 in this basic example.

* examples/tests/addition_rewrite
* examples/tests/addition_saturated
Rename main file to "addition.adb" now that all tests are in their own
subdir.

Change-Id: I2deeb13be38d807f35edcac0ee45427673c46ec3

docs/ug/en/appendix/gnatprove_limitations.rst, after:

.. index:: limitations

.. _GNATprove_Limitations:

|GNATprove| Limitations
=======================

.. _Tool Limitations:

Tool Limitations
----------------

#. The Global contracts generated automatically by |GNATprove| for subprograms
   without an explicit one do not take into account indirect calls (through
   access-to-subprogram and dynamic binding) and indirect reads/writes to
   global variables (through access variables).

#. Checks related to tasking, subprogram termination, or recursive calls do not
   take into account dispatching calls.

#. A subset of all Ada conversions between array types is supported:

   * element types must be exactly the same
   * matching index types must either be both modular with a base type of the
     same size, or both non modular

#. A subset of all Ada fixed-point types and fixed-point operations is
   supported:

   * multiplication and division between different fixed-point types and
     floating-point types are rejected
   * multiplication and division between a fixed-point type and a real literal
     are rejected, the fix is to qualify the real literal with a fixed-point
     type as in ``Fp_Type'(0.25)``
   * multiplication and division between different fixed-point types are
     rejected if their smalls are not *compatible* as defined in Ada RM
     G.2.3(21)
   * conversions from fixed-point types to floating-point types are rejected

   These restrictions ensure that the result of fixed-point operations always
   belongs to the *perfect result set* as defined in Ada RM G.2.3.

#. Multidimensional array types are supported up to 4 dimensions.

#. Loop_Invariant and Loop_Variant pragmas must appear before any non-scalar
   object declaration.

#. Inheriting the same subprogram from multiple interfaces is not supported.

#. Formal object parameters of generics of an unconstrained record type with
   per-object constrained fields are badly supported by the tool and may
   result in crashes in some cases.

#. Quantified expressions with an iterator over a multi dimensional array (for
   example ``for all Elem of Arr`` where ``Arr`` is a multi dimensional array)
   are not supported.

#. Constrained subtypes of class-wide types and 'Class attributes of
   constrained record types are not supported.

#. Abstract states cannot be marked ``Part_Of`` a single concurrent object (see
   |SPARK| RM 9(3)). An error is raised instead in such cases.

#. Classwide Global and Depends contracts as defined in SPARK RM 6.1.6 are not
   supported.

#. Task attributes Identity and Storage_Size are not supported.

#. Type_Invariant and Invariant aspects are not supported:

   * on private types declared in nested packages or child packages
   * on protected types
   * on tagged types
   * on components of tagged types if the tagged type is visible from inside the
     scope of the invariant bearing type.

#. Calls to protected subprograms and protected entries whose prefix denotes a
   formal subprogram parameter are not supported. Similarly, suspension on
   suspension objects given as formal subprogram parameters is not supported.

Legality Rules
--------------

#. |SPARK| Reference Manual rule 4.3(1), concerning use of the box
   symbol "<>" in aggregates, is not currently checked.

#. The rule concerned with asserting that all child packages which
   have state denoted as being Part_Of a more visible state
   abstraction are given as constituents in the refinement of the more
   visible state is not checked (|SPARK| Reference Manual rule
   7.2.6(6)).

#. The case of a state abstraction whose Part_Of aspect denotes a
   task or protected unit is not currently supported.

#. The case of a Refined_Post specification for a (protected) entry
   is not currently supported.

#. The use of Ada.Synchronous_Barriers.Synchronous_Barrier type is not currently
   allowed in |SPARK|.

#. Entry families are not currently allowed in |SPARK|.

Flow Analysis Limitations
-------------------------

.. index:: Depends; limitation

#. Flow dependencies caused by record assignments is not captured with perfect
   accuracy. This means that the value of one field might incorrectly be
   considered to participate in the derivation of another field that it does
   not really participate in.

.. index:: initialization; limitation

#. Initialization of multi-dimensional arrays with nested FOR loops can be only
   detected if the array bounds are given by static expressions. A possible
   solution is to use :ref:`Aspect Relaxed_Initialization` instead in such a
   case and to prove that only initialized data is read.

Proof Limitations
-----------------

.. index:: recursion; limitation

#. Postconditions of recursive functions called in contracts and assertion
   pragmas are not available, possibly leading to unproved checks. The current
   workaround is to use a non-recursive wrapper around those functions. Using
   the switch ``--info`` reveals where the information about postcondition may
   be lost.

.. index:: Valid; limitation

#. Attribute 'Valid is currently assumed to always return True.

.. index:: validity; limitation

#. Values read from an external source are assumed to be valid values.
   Currently there is no model of invalidity or undefinedness. The onus
   is on the user to ensure that all values read from an external source are
   valid. The use of an invalid value invalidates any proofs associated with
   the value.

#. The following attributes are not yet supported in proof: Adjacent, Aft,
   Bit_Order, Body_Version, Copy_Sign, Definite, Denorm, First_Valid, Fore,
   Last_Valid, Machine, all Machine_* attributes, Model, all Model_* attributes,
   Partition_Id, Remainder, Round, Safe_First, Safe_Last, Scale, Scaling, Small,
   Unbiased_Rounding, Version, Wide_Image, Wide_Value, Wide_Width,
   Wide_Wide_Image, Wide_Wide_Value, Wide_Wide_Width, Width.

   The attributes First_Bit, Last_Bit and Position are supported but if there is
   no record representation clause then we assume that their value is
   nonnegative.

#. The 'Update attribute on multidimensional unconstrained arrays is not
   yet fully supported in proof. Checks might be missing so currently an
   error is emitted for any use of the 'Update attribute on
   multidimensional unconstrained arrays.

#. |GNATprove| does not follow the value of tags for tagged objects. As a
   consequence, tag checks are currently unprovable in most cases.

.. index:: Loop_Invariant; limitation

#. Constants declared in loops before the loop invariant are handled as
   variables by the tool. This means in particular that any information
   about their values needed after the loop invariant must be stated explicitly
   in the loop invariant.

#. Preconditions on arithmetic and conversion operators (including Time_Of) in
   Ada.Execution_Time and Ada.Real_Time packages described in |SPARK| Reference
   Manual 9.19 are not yet implemented.

#. Preconditions on arithmetic and conversion operators (including Time_Of) in
   Ada.Calendar package are not yet implemented.
