##############
Tool Structure
##############

..
   devguide-meta:
   covers: overall tool pipeline, gnatprove orchestration, gnat2why modes,
   gnatwhy3 and why3server interfaces
   primary_code: src/gnatprove/, gnat2why/, why3/
   when_to_read: changes to tool orchestration, action scheduling, process
   boundaries, command-line plumbing, or cross-tool data flow

The SPARK tool is a tool that consists of several executables:

* gnatprove: This tool reads the command line, parses the project
  file, builds the set of analysis actions to run, invokes ``gnat2why`` on the
  required units, and finally generates the user-visible reports.
* gnat2why: It is invoked in two different modes. One mode generates global
  information, while the other performs flow analysis and proof. During the
  proof phase, gnat2why delegates some work to gnatwhy3.
* gnatwhy3: It processes a Why file and generates VCs that are then
  passed to provers via the why3server.
* why3server: A tool that takes care of spawning prover processes. It
  is better to have this in a dedicated tool instead of spawning them
  directly from gnatwhy3.
* the provers: Process prover input files and return proof results.

.. _gnatprove:

*********
gnatprove
*********

The gnatprove executable is the main entry point; it is the executable
that the user calls e.g. on the command line or from GNAT Studio. The
subsections explain the main steps performed by gnatprove.

Parsing the Command Line
========================

gnatprove needs to parse the project file to be able to fully interpret
switches, because the project file may also contain extra switches to
be passed to gnatprove. But some command line switches influence the
way the project is parsed. To break out of this circular dependency,
the command line is parsed several times:

 - Once only the actual command line (as in ``Ada.Command_Line``) is
   parsed for some switches that would terminate immediately such as
   ``--clean`` and ``--version``, and for switches that influence
   project parsing such as the ``-X`` switches and ``-aP``.
 - Then the actual command line is concatenated with the extra switches
   in the project file (if any), and the result is parsed again, now
   looking at all switches.
 - The previous step is repeated for all file-specific switches specified in
   the project file.

Inside ``configuration.adb``, there is a package ``CL_Switches`` that
represents command line switches (via command line or project file),
and there is a separate list of variables that represents synthesized
variables. For example, the timeout that will eventually be used by
gnatprove is synthesized from various command line switches, including
the ``--timeout`` switch.

.. _Generating Globals:

Generating Globals
==================

Processing of the SPARK source files relies on three kinds of information:
  - data-representation information produced by the target compiler,
  - global information produced by ``gnat2why`` and stored in ALI files,
  - flow-analysis and proof results produced by ``gnat2why``.

These concerns are useful for understanding the overall flow, but
``gnatprove`` does not execute them as a simple sequence of separate phases.
Instead, it builds a dependency graph of analysis actions and executes it
through the ``GPR2.Build`` infrastructure. Global generation,
data-representation generation, and analysis are therefore scheduled together,
and additional work may be discovered while processing dependencies.

Build Actions
=============

``gnatprove`` uses project information to determine the units that need to be
processed, computes their dependencies, and then creates build actions for the
relevant work:

  - actions that invoke ``gnat2why`` in global-generation mode,
  - actions that invoke the compiler in data-representation mode, and
  - actions that invoke ``gnat2why`` in analysis mode.

These actions are connected by their file dependencies, so incremental
re-execution is handled by the build engine rather than by a separate external
builder process. In addition to the traditional ALI output of
global-generation actions, these actions now also register a
``.spark_error`` output file that is used later during report generation.

Generating data representation information
==========================================

Data-representation information is generated by dedicated build actions that
invoke the target compiler in a mode that emits JSON instead of object code.
These JSON files become inputs to the corresponding analysis actions, together
with the relevant ALI files.

The compiler invocation goes through ``spark_data_rep_wrapper``. This wrapper
suppresses compiler output in normal operation and ensures that the expected
JSON files are present even if the compiler fails, so later analysis steps can
still consume well-formed data-representation outputs.

Passing options to gnat2why
===========================

Because gnat2why is essentially a modified gcc and shares e.g. command
line parsing, it's not easy to add switches so that gnatprove can pass
information to gnat2why. So we added a single switch ``-gnates``,
which passes a single file in JSON format to gnat2why, that contains
all the extra information we need. The unit ``gnat2why_args`` handles
the reading and writing of that file.

The switch ``Global_Gen_Mode`` dictates if gnat2why is in global-generation
mode or in analysis mode.

Copying ALI files and phase-1 diagnostics
=========================================

Analysis actions consume ALI files produced by global-generation actions. For
library projects, the global-generation action also takes care of copying the
generated ALI file to the library ALI directory when needed, so the build
action itself is responsible for making these files available to later work.

Each global-generation action also produces a ``.spark_error`` file. This file
contains the frontend warnings and errors collected during phase 1, and it is
written even when compilation errors prevent later analysis from running. This
extra artifact is what allows report generation to include frontend diagnostics
in SARIF for early-exit runs.

Translating to Why
==================

Analysis actions invoke ``gnat2why`` in analysis mode. They consume the source
unit together with the ALI and data-representation information selected by
``gnatprove`` for that unit and its dependencies, and they produce the
machine-readable ``.spark`` output used later for reporting.

Generating the SPARK report
===========================

Once the build actions have finished, ``gnatprove`` generates reports from the
``.spark`` files that were produced during analysis and the ``.spark_error``
files that were produced during global generation. The textual summary is
written to ``gnatprove.out`` and a SARIF report is also generated in
``gnatprove.sarif``.

********
gnat2why
********

gnat2why has many tasks:
 - It generates global information (and is invoked in a special mode
   just for that);
 - It identifies SPARK code (in a phase called Marking);
 - It does flow analysis;
 - It does (part of) proof;
 - It produces analysis results in the form of check messages.

Other chapters detail what exatly happens in gnat2why. Here we mainly
focus on the interface of gnat2why with other programs.

``gnat2why`` is invoked by ``gnatprove`` on the relevant units in two modes:
once for global generation, then for analysis. As explained in the
:ref:`Gnatprove` section, these invocations are now managed by
``gnatprove``'s build-action graph rather than by ``gprbuild``.

The "proof" part of gnat2why first serializes the GNAT tree to a Json
file. Then it invokes gnatwhy3 on that file. It reads back the results
of gnatwhy3 and interprets them to produce its own output on standard
output. Most of the command line options for gnatwhy3 are in fact
computed by gnatprove, and passed to gnat2why via the ``gnat2why_args``
mechanism.

In addition to the compiler-like output of gnat2why on standard
output, gnat2why produces a machine-parsable output in .spark files
(if the SPARK input unit is e.g. ``main.adb``, the corresponding
machine-parsable output is ``main.spark``).

When invoked in global-generation mode, ``gnat2why`` also produces a
``.spark_error`` JSON file. This file stores the frontend diagnostics gathered
in phase 1. If compilation errors are detected during global generation,
``gnat2why`` writes the ``.spark_error`` file and returns without continuing
to the later tree-processing steps.

********************************
gnatwhy3, why3server and provers
********************************

gnatwhy3 reads the Gnat tree from a Json file as produced by gnat2why,
converts it to the tree of a Why3 program, uses the Why3 library to
generate verification conditions (VCs) from them, and to run provers on
the verification conditions. A separate chapter describes how gnatwhy3
works. Here we mainly focus on the interface with other programs.

- gnat2why: Gnat AST → Json-serialized Gnat AST
- gnatwhy3: Json-serialized Gnat AST → Gnat AST → Why3 AST
- why3: Why3 AST → Typed Why3 AST → …

The Why3 program that is generated by gnatwhy3 from the Gnat tree
depends only on the Why3 standard library and a few static files shipped
with SPARK, but not on other Why3 files produced by gnat2why or other
processes. gnatwhy3 processes Why3 tree and generates verification
conditions in files. The format of these files depends on the prover
which is intended to be run on these files.

gnatwhy3 could spawn the prover processes directly, but for various
reasons it is better to delegate this to another process:

 - gnatwhy3 occupies a lot of memory, and spawning processes from a
   process with a lot of memory can be costly on Linux;
 - We want to run provers in parallel (when the user provides the -j
   switch), but gnatwhy3 is too deep in the call chain to know how
   many provers it is allowed to spawn in parallel. The why3server is
   at the top of the call chain and can spawn up to ``j`` provers.

gnatwhy3 connects to the server via a unix socket (on Unix) or a named
pipe (on Windows), using a custom protocol. The server receives the
command line to run from gnatwhy3, including a timeout. The server
returns the textual output of the command to gnatwhy3, or information
that the command has reached the timeout.

The name of the socket (file system path on linux and name in a separate
namespace on windows) is passed to ``gnatwhy3`` by ``gnatprove`` via the
environment variable ``GNATPROVE_SOCKET``.

The only thing that gnatwhy3 runs via the server are prover processes.
Provers process a file in their own syntax or in SMTLib syntax, and
produce a simple answer (e.g. unsat or unknown). gnatwhy3 knows how to
interpret the textual answer of the prover and translates it to a
"proved/unproved" information.

When all prover processes are finished or have reached the timeout,
gnatwhy3 terminates and produces a result dictionary in JSON on
standard output.

``gnat2why`` spawns multiple instances of ``gnatwhy3`` in parallel, however it
has no knowledge over how many it is allowed to spawn. We use a semaphore for
this purpose: ``gnatprove`` creates a semaphore upon startup initialized to the
number of allowed parallel processes, and each ``gnatwhy3`` invocation is
wrapped by a ``spark_semaphore_wrapper`` binary. This wrapper simply decrements
the semaphore (potentially waiting until this is possible) on startup and
increments it on exit, calling gnatwhy3 in between. ``gnatprove`` passes the
name of the semaphore to the spark_semaphore_wrapper via the environment
variable ``GNATPROVE_SEMAPHORE``.


*****************
Report Generation
*****************

Report generation happens after analysis, inside ``gnatprove``. It reads the
``.spark`` files produced by the analysis actions together with the
``.spark_error`` files produced by global-generation actions, and aggregates
them into the user-visible outputs.

The ``.spark`` files remain the main source of flow and proof diagnostics.
The ``.spark_error`` files are used to carry frontend diagnostics that are
already known in phase 1, especially in runs that stop before analysis because
of compilation errors. When a ``.spark`` file exists for a unit, the
corresponding ``.spark_error`` file is expected to be empty so that diagnostics
are not duplicated.

At present, the main outputs are:

 - ``gnatprove.out``, the textual summary report;
 - ``gnatprove.sarif``, the SARIF report for tool integration.

***************
IDE Integration
***************

GNATprove can be called both from the command-line and from within one of the
two IDEs developed at AdaCore: GNAT Studio or GNATbench (a plugin of Eclipse).

A general principle is that as little logic as possible should be put in the
IDE support, as:
 - the support may be IDE-specific which entails duplication,
 - we may drop some IDE and add support for others in the future,
 - most features should be usable from the command-line, and
 - it is easier to test features from the command-line.

As an example, the generation of counterexample is attempted for all unproved
checks, and when successful a corresponding trace is added in the
:file:`.spark` file which lists the lines of code and values of variables which
constitute the counterexample in JSON format. The IDE integration consists
simply in displaying that information when requested by the user.

The IDE integration consists mostly in the following files inside ``gps``
repository, under ``share/plug-ins``:
 - file :file:`spark2014.py` defines the GNAT Studio integration
 - file :file:`spark2014/gnatprove.xml` defines the pop-up panels and Build
   Targets (shared between GNAT Studio and GNATbench)
 - file :file:`spark2014/gnatprove_menus.xml` defines the menus (shared between
   GNAT Studio and GNATbench)
 - file :file:`spark2014/itp_lib.py` defines the interactive proof support in
   GNAT Studio

In addition to the above XML files, the GNATbench integration consists in code
mapping the menus to actions inside Eclipse. The GNATbench integration is more
basic than the GNAT Studio one.
