docs/ug/en/source/how_to_view_gnatprove_output.rst, before:

How to View |GNATprove| Output
==============================

|GNATprove| produces two kinds of outputs: the one which is echoed to standard
output or displayed in your IDE (GPS or GNATbench), and a textual summary of
the analysis results.

The Analysis Report Panel
-------------------------

GPS can display an interactive view reporting the results of the analysis, with
a count of issues per file, subprogram and severity, as well as filters to
selectively view a subset of the issues only. This interactive view is
displayed using the menu :menuselection:`SPARK --> Show Report`. This menu
becomes available after the checkbox ``Display analysis report`` is checked in
the |SPARK| section of the Preferences dialog - menu :menuselection:`Edit -->
Preferences`, and only if |GNATprove| was run so that there are results to
display.

Here is an example of this view:

.. image:: /static/analysis_report_panel.png

.. _The Analysis Results Summary File:

The Analysis Results Summary File
---------------------------------

|GNATprove| generates global project statistics in file ``gnatprove.out``,
which can be displayed in GPS using the menu :menuselection:`SPARK --> Show
Log`. The file ``gnatprove.out`` is generated in the ``gnatprove`` subdirectory
of the object directory of the project.

When switch ``--output-header`` is used, this file starts with a header
containing extra information about the run including:

* The date and time of GNATprove run
* The GNATprove version that has generated this report
* The host for which GNATprove is configured (e.g. Windows 32 bits)
* The full command-line of the GNATprove invocation, including project file
* The GNATprove switches specified in the project file

A summary table at the start of file ``gnatprove.out`` provides an overview of
the verification results for all checks in the project. The table may look like
this::

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  SPARK Analysis results        Total          Flow   Interval   CodePeer                        Provers   Justified   Unproved
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Data Dependencies               281           281          .          .                              .           .          .
  Flow Dependencies               228           228          .          .                              .           .          .
  Initialization                  693           692          .          .                              .           1          .
  Non-Aliasing                      .             .          .          .                              .           .          .
  Run-time Checks                 474             .          .          .     458 (CVC4 95%, Trivial 5%)          16          .
  Assertions                       45             .          .          .     45 (CVC4 82%, Trivial 18%)           .          .
  Functional Contracts            304             .          .          .    302 (CVC4 82%, Trivial 18%)           2          .
  LSP Verification                  .             .          .          .                              .           .          .
  Termination                       .             .          .          .                              .           .          .
  Concurrency                       .             .          .          .                              .           .          .
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Total                          2025    1201 (59%)          .          .                      805 (40%)     19 (1%)          .

The following table explains the lines of the summary table:

.. tabularcolumns:: |l|p{5in}|

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Line Description", "Explanation"
   :widths: 1, 5

   "Data Dependencies", "Verification of :ref:`Data Dependencies` and parameter modes"
   "Flow Dependencies", "Verification of :ref:`Flow Dependencies`"
   "Initialization", "Verification of :ref:`Data Initialization Policy`"
   "Non-Aliasing", "Verification of :ref:`Absence of Interferences`"
   "Run-time Checks", "Verification of absence of run-time errors (AoRTE) (except those raising ``Storage_Error``)"
   "Assertions", "Verification of :ref:`Assertion Pragmas`"
   "Functional Contracts", "Verification of functional contracts (includes :ref:`Subprogram Contracts`, :ref:`Package Contracts` and :ref:`Type Contracts`)"
   "LSP Verification", "Verification related to :ref:`Object Oriented Programming and Liskov Substitution Principle`"
   "Termination", "Verification related to :ref:`Loop Variants` and :ref:`Subprogram Termination`"
   "Concurrency", "Verification related to :ref:`Concurrency and Ravenscar Profile`"

We now explain the columns of the table.

* The ``Total`` column describes the total number of checks in this category.

* The ``Flow`` column describes the number of checks proved by flow analysis.

* The ``Interval`` column describes the number of checks (overflow and range
  checks) proved by a simple static analysis of bounds for floating-point
  expressions based on type bounds of sub-expressions.

* The ``CodePeer`` column describes the number of checks proved by calling
  CodePeer when :ref:`Using CodePeer Static Analysis`.

* The ``Provers`` column describes the number of checks proved by automatic or
  manual provers. The column also gives information on the provers used, and
  the percentage of checks proved by each prover. Note that sometimes a check
  is proved by a combination of provers, hence the use of percentage instead of
  an absolute count. Also note that generally the prover which is run first (as
  determined by the ``--prover`` command line switch) proves the most checks,
  because each prover is called only on those checks that were not previously
  proved. The prover percentages are provided in alphabetical order. The special
  name ``Trivial`` is used to refer to an internal simplication that discards
  checks that are trivially true.

* The ``Justified`` column contains the number of checks for which the user has
  provided a :ref:`Direct Justification with Pragma Annotate`.

* Finally, the column ``Unproved`` counts the checks which have neither been
  proved nor justified.

After the summary table, a line states the maximal steps that were consumed by
automated provers. The line may look like this::

   max steps used for successful proof: 1234

The use of this line is to help with reproducability of a run of |GNATprove|
that proved all checks and properties. If the user provides the given number
via the ``--steps`` option to |GNATprove|, and disables the time and memory
limits, (if enabled directly or indirectly such as via the ``--level``
switch), then |GNATprove| will again prove all checks and properties. For
example, if a user has proved all checks in a project using an invocation of
|GNATprove| as follows::

    gnatprove -P <projectfile> --level=2

then the following command will also prove all checks::

    gnatprove -P <projectfile> --level=2 --timeout=0 --memlimit=0 --steps=1234

The next contents in the file are statistics describing:

* which units were analyzed (with flow analysis, proof, or both)
* which subprograms in these units were analyzed (with flow analysis, proof, or
  both)
* the results of this analysis

.. _Categories of Messages:

Categories of Messages
----------------------

|GNATprove| issues four different kinds of messages: errors, warnings,
check messages and information messages.

* Errors are issued for |SPARK| violations or other language legality problems,
  or any other problem which does not allow to proceed to analysis.  Errors
  cannot be suppressed and must be fixed to proceed with analysis.

* Warnings are issued for any suspicious situation like unused values of
  variables, useless assignments, etc. Warnings are prefixed with the text
  ``"warning: "`` and can be suppressed with ``pragma Warnings``, see section
  :ref:`Suppressing Warnings`.

* Check messages are issued for any potential problem in the code which could
  affect the correctness of the program, such as missing initialization,
  possible failing run-time checks or unproved assertions. Checks come with a
  severity, and depending on the severity the message text is prefixed with
  ``"low: "``, ``"medium: "`` or ``"high: "``. Check messages cannot be
  suppressed like warnings, but they can be individually justified with pragma
  ``Annotate``, see section :ref:`Justifying Check Messages`.

* Information messages are issued to notify the user of limitations of
  |GNATprove| on some constructs, or to prevent possible confusion in
  understanding the output of |GNATprove|. They are also issued to report
  proved checks in some modes of |GNATprove|.

.. _Effect of Mode on Output:

Effect of Mode on Output
------------------------

|GNATprove| can be run in four different modes, as selected with the switch
``--mode=<mode>``, whose possible values are ``check``, ``check_all``,
``flow``, ``prove`` and ``all`` (see :ref:`Running GNATprove from the Command
Line`). The output depends on the selected mode.

In modes ``check`` and ``check_all``, |GNATprove| prints on the standard output
a list of error messages for violations of |SPARK| restrictions on all the code
for which ``SPARK_Mode`` is ``On``.

In modes ``flow`` and ``prove``, this checking is done as a first phase.

In mode ``flow``, |GNATprove| prints on the standard output messages for
possible reads of uninitialized data, mismatches betwen the specified data
dependencies and flow dependencies and the implementation, and suspicious
situations such as unused assignments and missing return statements. These
messages are all based on flow analysis.

In mode ``prove``, |GNATprove| prints on the standard output messages for
possible reads of uninitialized data (using flow analysis), possible run-time
errors and mismatches between the specified functional contracts and the
implementation (using proof).

In mode ``all``, |GNATprove| prints on the standard output both messages for
mode ``flow`` and for mode ``prove``.

If switch ``--report=all``, ``--report=provers`` or ``--report=statistics`` is
specified, |GNATprove| additionally prints on the standard output information
messages for proved checks.

Description of Messages
-----------------------

This section lists the different messages which |GNATprove| may output. Each
message points to a very specific place in the source code.  For example, if a
source file ``file.adb`` contains a division as follows::

      if X / Y > Z then ...

|GNATprove| may output a message such as::

   file.adb:12:37: medium: divide by zero might fail

where the division sign ``/`` is precisely on line 12, column 37. Looking at
the explanation in the first table below, which states that a division check
verifies that the divisor is different from zero, it is clear that the message
is about ``Y``, and that |GNATprove| was unable to prove that ``Y`` cannot be
zero. The explanations in the table below should be read with the context that
is given by the source location.

When switch ``--cwe`` is used, a corresponding CWE id is included in the
message when relevant. For example, on the example above, |GNATprove| will
output a message such as::

   file.adb:12:37: medium: divide by zero might fail [CWE 369]

Note that CWE ids are only included in check messages and warnings, never in
information messages about proved checks. For more information on CWE, see the
MITRE Corporation's Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE) Compatibility and
Effectiveness Program (`http://cwe.mitre.org/ <http://cwe.mitre.org/>`_). The
current version of |GNATprove| is based on CWE version 3.2 released on January
3, 2019.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   proof_checks_table
   flow_checks_table

Messages of a specific category or related to a specific CWE can be filtered
inside GPS by typing the desired substring in the search bar of the
``Locations`` panel. For example, search for "CWE" to get all messages with a
corresponding CWE, or "CWE 369" to get all messages related to division by zero
vulnerability.

.. _Understanding Counterexamples:

Understanding Counterexamples
-----------------------------

When a check cannot be proved, |GNATprove| may generate a counterexample. A
counterexample consists in two parts:

* a path (or set of paths) through the subprogram
* an assignment of values to variables that appear on that path

The best way to look at a counterexample is to display it in GPS by clicking on
the icon to the left of the failed proof message, or to the left of the
corresponding line in the editor (see :ref:`Running GNATprove from
GPS`). |GNATprove| then displays the path in one color, and the values of
variables on the path by inserting lines in the editor only (not in the file)
which display these values. For example, consider procedure ``Counterex``:

.. literalinclude:: /gnatprove_by_example/examples/counterex.adb
   :language: ada
   :linenos:

The assertion on line 11 may fail when input parameter ``Cond`` is ``True`` and
input parameters ``I1`` and ``I2`` are too big. The counterexample generated by
|GNATprove| is displayed as follows in GPS, where each line highlighted in the
path is followed by a line showing the value of variables from the previous
line:

.. image:: /static/counterexample.png
   :width: 800 px
   :alt: Counterexample in GPS

|GNATprove| also completes the message for the failed proof with an explanation
giving the values of variables from the checked expression for the
counterexample. Here, the message issued by |GNATprove| on line 11 gives the
value of output parameter ``R``:

.. literalinclude:: /gnatprove_by_example/results/counterex.prove
   :language: none
   :lines: 4

The counterexample generated by |GNATprove| does not always correspond to a
feasible execution of the program:

#. When some contracts or loop invariants are missing, thus causing the
   property to become unprovable (see details in section on :ref:`Investigating
   Unprovable Properties`), the counterexample may help point to the missing
   contract or loop invariant. For example, the postcondition of procedure
   ``Double_In_Call`` is not provable because the postcondition of the function
   ``Double`` that it calls is too weak, and the postcondition of procedure
   ``Double_In_Loop`` is not provable because its loop does not have a loop
   invariant:

   .. literalinclude:: /gnatprove_by_example/examples/counterex_unprovable.ads
      :language: ada
      :linenos:

   .. literalinclude:: /gnatprove_by_example/examples/counterex_unprovable.adb
      :language: ada
      :linenos:

   The counterexample generated by |GNATprove| in both cases shows that the
   prover could deduce wrongly that ``X`` on ouput is -3 when its value is 1 on
   input, due to a missing contract in the function called or a missing loop
   invariant the loop executed:

   .. literalinclude:: /gnatprove_by_example/results/counterex_unprovable.prove
      :language: none

#. When some property cannot be proved due to prover shortcomings (see details
   in section on :ref:`Investigating Prover Shortcomings`), the counterexample
   may explain why the prover cannot prove the property. However, note that
   since the counterexample is always generated only using CVC4 prover, it can
   just explain why this prover cannot prove the property. Also note that if
   CVC4 is not selected and generating of a counterexample is not disabled by
   ``--no-counterexample`` switch, a counterexample is still attempted to be
   generated using CVC4, but the proof result of CVC4 is not taken into account
   in this case.

#. When using a short value of timeout or steps, the prover may hit the
   resource bound before it has produced a full counterexample. In such a case,
   the counterexample produced may not correspond to a feasible execution.

#. When the value of ``--proof`` switch is ``per_check`` (the default value),
   then the counterexample gives values to variables on all paths through the
   subprogram, not only the path which corresponds to the feasible
   execution. One can rerun |GNATprove| with value ``progressive`` or
   ``per_path`` to separate possible execution paths in the counterexample.

Commit message:

S903-023 replace GPS by GNAT Studio in documentation
This impacts:
- SPARK UG in English and Japanese
- SPARK adoption guidance
- our internal devel guide

Change-Id: I3c51ec5fffa3b3a04695a9cd0fa05a5d435328e4

docs/ug/en/source/how_to_view_gnatprove_output.rst, after:

How to View |GNATprove| Output
==============================

|GNATprove| produces two kinds of outputs: the one which is echoed to standard
output or displayed in your IDE (GNAT Studio or GNATbench), and a textual summary of
the analysis results.

The Analysis Report Panel
-------------------------

GNAT Studio can display an interactive view reporting the results of the analysis, with
a count of issues per file, subprogram and severity, as well as filters to
selectively view a subset of the issues only. This interactive view is
displayed using the menu :menuselection:`SPARK --> Show Report`. This menu
becomes available after the checkbox ``Display analysis report`` is checked in
the |SPARK| section of the Preferences dialog - menu :menuselection:`Edit -->
Preferences`, and only if |GNATprove| was run so that there are results to
display.

Here is an example of this view:

.. image:: /static/analysis_report_panel.png

.. _The Analysis Results Summary File:

The Analysis Results Summary File
---------------------------------

|GNATprove| generates global project statistics in file ``gnatprove.out``,
which can be displayed in GNAT Studio using the menu :menuselection:`SPARK --> Show
Log`. The file ``gnatprove.out`` is generated in the ``gnatprove`` subdirectory
of the object directory of the project.

When switch ``--output-header`` is used, this file starts with a header
containing extra information about the run including:

* The date and time of GNATprove run
* The GNATprove version that has generated this report
* The host for which GNATprove is configured (e.g. Windows 32 bits)
* The full command-line of the GNATprove invocation, including project file
* The GNATprove switches specified in the project file

A summary table at the start of file ``gnatprove.out`` provides an overview of
the verification results for all checks in the project. The table may look like
this::

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  SPARK Analysis results        Total          Flow   Interval   CodePeer                        Provers   Justified   Unproved
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Data Dependencies               281           281          .          .                              .           .          .
  Flow Dependencies               228           228          .          .                              .           .          .
  Initialization                  693           692          .          .                              .           1          .
  Non-Aliasing                      .             .          .          .                              .           .          .
  Run-time Checks                 474             .          .          .     458 (CVC4 95%, Trivial 5%)          16          .
  Assertions                       45             .          .          .     45 (CVC4 82%, Trivial 18%)           .          .
  Functional Contracts            304             .          .          .    302 (CVC4 82%, Trivial 18%)           2          .
  LSP Verification                  .             .          .          .                              .           .          .
  Termination                       .             .          .          .                              .           .          .
  Concurrency                       .             .          .          .                              .           .          .
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Total                          2025    1201 (59%)          .          .                      805 (40%)     19 (1%)          .

The following table explains the lines of the summary table:

.. tabularcolumns:: |l|p{5in}|

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Line Description", "Explanation"
   :widths: 1, 5

   "Data Dependencies", "Verification of :ref:`Data Dependencies` and parameter modes"
   "Flow Dependencies", "Verification of :ref:`Flow Dependencies`"
   "Initialization", "Verification of :ref:`Data Initialization Policy`"
   "Non-Aliasing", "Verification of :ref:`Absence of Interferences`"
   "Run-time Checks", "Verification of absence of run-time errors (AoRTE) (except those raising ``Storage_Error``)"
   "Assertions", "Verification of :ref:`Assertion Pragmas`"
   "Functional Contracts", "Verification of functional contracts (includes :ref:`Subprogram Contracts`, :ref:`Package Contracts` and :ref:`Type Contracts`)"
   "LSP Verification", "Verification related to :ref:`Object Oriented Programming and Liskov Substitution Principle`"
   "Termination", "Verification related to :ref:`Loop Variants` and :ref:`Subprogram Termination`"
   "Concurrency", "Verification related to :ref:`Concurrency and Ravenscar Profile`"

We now explain the columns of the table.

* The ``Total`` column describes the total number of checks in this category.

* The ``Flow`` column describes the number of checks proved by flow analysis.

* The ``Interval`` column describes the number of checks (overflow and range
  checks) proved by a simple static analysis of bounds for floating-point
  expressions based on type bounds of sub-expressions.

* The ``CodePeer`` column describes the number of checks proved by calling
  CodePeer when :ref:`Using CodePeer Static Analysis`.

* The ``Provers`` column describes the number of checks proved by automatic or
  manual provers. The column also gives information on the provers used, and
  the percentage of checks proved by each prover. Note that sometimes a check
  is proved by a combination of provers, hence the use of percentage instead of
  an absolute count. Also note that generally the prover which is run first (as
  determined by the ``--prover`` command line switch) proves the most checks,
  because each prover is called only on those checks that were not previously
  proved. The prover percentages are provided in alphabetical order. The special
  name ``Trivial`` is used to refer to an internal simplication that discards
  checks that are trivially true.

* The ``Justified`` column contains the number of checks for which the user has
  provided a :ref:`Direct Justification with Pragma Annotate`.

* Finally, the column ``Unproved`` counts the checks which have neither been
  proved nor justified.

After the summary table, a line states the maximal steps that were consumed by
automated provers. The line may look like this::

   max steps used for successful proof: 1234

The use of this line is to help with reproducability of a run of |GNATprove|
that proved all checks and properties. If the user provides the given number
via the ``--steps`` option to |GNATprove|, and disables the time and memory
limits, (if enabled directly or indirectly such as via the ``--level``
switch), then |GNATprove| will again prove all checks and properties. For
example, if a user has proved all checks in a project using an invocation of
|GNATprove| as follows::

    gnatprove -P <projectfile> --level=2

then the following command will also prove all checks::

    gnatprove -P <projectfile> --level=2 --timeout=0 --memlimit=0 --steps=1234

The next contents in the file are statistics describing:

* which units were analyzed (with flow analysis, proof, or both)
* which subprograms in these units were analyzed (with flow analysis, proof, or
  both)
* the results of this analysis

.. _Categories of Messages:

Categories of Messages
----------------------

|GNATprove| issues four different kinds of messages: errors, warnings,
check messages and information messages.

* Errors are issued for |SPARK| violations or other language legality problems,
  or any other problem which does not allow to proceed to analysis.  Errors
  cannot be suppressed and must be fixed to proceed with analysis.

* Warnings are issued for any suspicious situation like unused values of
  variables, useless assignments, etc. Warnings are prefixed with the text
  ``"warning: "`` and can be suppressed with ``pragma Warnings``, see section
  :ref:`Suppressing Warnings`.

* Check messages are issued for any potential problem in the code which could
  affect the correctness of the program, such as missing initialization,
  possible failing run-time checks or unproved assertions. Checks come with a
  severity, and depending on the severity the message text is prefixed with
  ``"low: "``, ``"medium: "`` or ``"high: "``. Check messages cannot be
  suppressed like warnings, but they can be individually justified with pragma
  ``Annotate``, see section :ref:`Justifying Check Messages`.

* Information messages are issued to notify the user of limitations of
  |GNATprove| on some constructs, or to prevent possible confusion in
  understanding the output of |GNATprove|. They are also issued to report
  proved checks in some modes of |GNATprove|.

.. _Effect of Mode on Output:

Effect of Mode on Output
------------------------

|GNATprove| can be run in four different modes, as selected with the switch
``--mode=<mode>``, whose possible values are ``check``, ``check_all``,
``flow``, ``prove`` and ``all`` (see :ref:`Running GNATprove from the Command
Line`). The output depends on the selected mode.

In modes ``check`` and ``check_all``, |GNATprove| prints on the standard output
a list of error messages for violations of |SPARK| restrictions on all the code
for which ``SPARK_Mode`` is ``On``.

In modes ``flow`` and ``prove``, this checking is done as a first phase.

In mode ``flow``, |GNATprove| prints on the standard output messages for
possible reads of uninitialized data, mismatches betwen the specified data
dependencies and flow dependencies and the implementation, and suspicious
situations such as unused assignments and missing return statements. These
messages are all based on flow analysis.

In mode ``prove``, |GNATprove| prints on the standard output messages for
possible reads of uninitialized data (using flow analysis), possible run-time
errors and mismatches between the specified functional contracts and the
implementation (using proof).

In mode ``all``, |GNATprove| prints on the standard output both messages for
mode ``flow`` and for mode ``prove``.

If switch ``--report=all``, ``--report=provers`` or ``--report=statistics`` is
specified, |GNATprove| additionally prints on the standard output information
messages for proved checks.

Description of Messages
-----------------------

This section lists the different messages which |GNATprove| may output. Each
message points to a very specific place in the source code.  For example, if a
source file ``file.adb`` contains a division as follows::

      if X / Y > Z then ...

|GNATprove| may output a message such as::

   file.adb:12:37: medium: divide by zero might fail

where the division sign ``/`` is precisely on line 12, column 37. Looking at
the explanation in the first table below, which states that a division check
verifies that the divisor is different from zero, it is clear that the message
is about ``Y``, and that |GNATprove| was unable to prove that ``Y`` cannot be
zero. The explanations in the table below should be read with the context that
is given by the source location.

When switch ``--cwe`` is used, a corresponding CWE id is included in the
message when relevant. For example, on the example above, |GNATprove| will
output a message such as::

   file.adb:12:37: medium: divide by zero might fail [CWE 369]

Note that CWE ids are only included in check messages and warnings, never in
information messages about proved checks. For more information on CWE, see the
MITRE Corporation's Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE) Compatibility and
Effectiveness Program (`http://cwe.mitre.org/ <http://cwe.mitre.org/>`_). The
current version of |GNATprove| is based on CWE version 3.2 released on January
3, 2019.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   proof_checks_table
   flow_checks_table

Messages of a specific category or related to a specific CWE can be filtered
inside GNAT Studio by typing the desired substring in the search bar of the
``Locations`` panel. For example, search for "CWE" to get all messages with a
corresponding CWE, or "CWE 369" to get all messages related to division by zero
vulnerability.

.. _Understanding Counterexamples:

Understanding Counterexamples
-----------------------------

When a check cannot be proved, |GNATprove| may generate a counterexample. A
counterexample consists in two parts:

* a path (or set of paths) through the subprogram
* an assignment of values to variables that appear on that path

The best way to look at a counterexample is to display it in GNAT Studio by clicking on
the icon to the left of the failed proof message, or to the left of the
corresponding line in the editor (see :ref:`Running GNATprove from
GNAT Studio`). |GNATprove| then displays the path in one color, and the values of
variables on the path by inserting lines in the editor only (not in the file)
which display these values. For example, consider procedure ``Counterex``:

.. literalinclude:: /gnatprove_by_example/examples/counterex.adb
   :language: ada
   :linenos:

The assertion on line 11 may fail when input parameter ``Cond`` is ``True`` and
input parameters ``I1`` and ``I2`` are too big. The counterexample generated by
|GNATprove| is displayed as follows in GNAT Studio, where each line highlighted in the
path is followed by a line showing the value of variables from the previous
line:

.. image:: /static/counterexample.png
   :width: 800 px
   :alt: Counterexample in GNAT Studio

|GNATprove| also completes the message for the failed proof with an explanation
giving the values of variables from the checked expression for the
counterexample. Here, the message issued by |GNATprove| on line 11 gives the
value of output parameter ``R``:

.. literalinclude:: /gnatprove_by_example/results/counterex.prove
   :language: none
   :lines: 4

The counterexample generated by |GNATprove| does not always correspond to a
feasible execution of the program:

#. When some contracts or loop invariants are missing, thus causing the
   property to become unprovable (see details in section on :ref:`Investigating
   Unprovable Properties`), the counterexample may help point to the missing
   contract or loop invariant. For example, the postcondition of procedure
   ``Double_In_Call`` is not provable because the postcondition of the function
   ``Double`` that it calls is too weak, and the postcondition of procedure
   ``Double_In_Loop`` is not provable because its loop does not have a loop
   invariant:

   .. literalinclude:: /gnatprove_by_example/examples/counterex_unprovable.ads
      :language: ada
      :linenos:

   .. literalinclude:: /gnatprove_by_example/examples/counterex_unprovable.adb
      :language: ada
      :linenos:

   The counterexample generated by |GNATprove| in both cases shows that the
   prover could deduce wrongly that ``X`` on ouput is -3 when its value is 1 on
   input, due to a missing contract in the function called or a missing loop
   invariant the loop executed:

   .. literalinclude:: /gnatprove_by_example/results/counterex_unprovable.prove
      :language: none

#. When some property cannot be proved due to prover shortcomings (see details
   in section on :ref:`Investigating Prover Shortcomings`), the counterexample
   may explain why the prover cannot prove the property. However, note that
   since the counterexample is always generated only using CVC4 prover, it can
   just explain why this prover cannot prove the property. Also note that if
   CVC4 is not selected and generating of a counterexample is not disabled by
   ``--no-counterexample`` switch, a counterexample is still attempted to be
   generated using CVC4, but the proof result of CVC4 is not taken into account
   in this case.

#. When using a short value of timeout or steps, the prover may hit the
   resource bound before it has produced a full counterexample. In such a case,
   the counterexample produced may not correspond to a feasible execution.

#. When the value of ``--proof`` switch is ``per_check`` (the default value),
   then the counterexample gives values to variables on all paths through the
   subprogram, not only the path which corresponds to the feasible
   execution. One can rerun |GNATprove| with value ``progressive`` or
   ``per_path`` to separate possible execution paths in the counterexample.
