testsuite/gnatprove/README.md, before:

Contents
========

This directory contains the testsuite for SPARK 2014.

Requirements
============

Python >= 3.7
e3-testsuite via `pip install` or from
[github](https://github.com/AdaCore/e3-testsuite).

Running the testsuite
=====================

Simply run
```
./run-tests
```

You can add the `--help` switch to see other options.

Test structure
==============

Each subdirectory of `tests` is a separate testcase, the directory name is
equal to the test name.

By default, a test just contains Ada sources and an expected output in the
`test.out` file. In this case, the test driver runs the python function
`prove_all()`, or `do_flow()` if the test directory name contains the `__flow`
substring. Both functions are defined in the helper library in
`lib/python/test_support.py`.  Arguments to this call can be provided via a
`test.yaml` file in the test directory, in the following form:

```
prove_all:
  steps: 100
  prover: ["cvc4"]
  ...
```

The term `prove_all` above must be replaced by `do_flow` in the case of a test
that contains `__flow`. The keys are identical to the named parameters of the
corresponding python functions, see those functions for more information.

This default behavior can be overridden by placing a `test.py` file in the test
directory. In that case the test simply runs that test.py file. An existing
`test.yaml` file is ignored in that case.

Commit message:

TC01-001, TB20-004 use test.yaml for large
Instead of using the test.opt to mark tests as large, we use a
special entry in the test.yaml for that.

* run-tests
(SPARKControlCreator): new class enables test.opt parsing (via
  inheritance from AdaCoreLegacyTestControlCreator) plus checking of
  large entry in test.yaml
(ProofTestDriver): now used for all tests, not only tests without
  test.py. Changed so that default test.py is only created when not
  present. Uses environment entries to create default test.py.
(FlowTestDriver): removed
(SPARKTestFinder): yaml file always read when considering test,
  populating test environment. Sanity checking of test.yaml
  contents.  Filtering of large tests when not enabled via switch or
  discriminant.
(SPARKTestsuite): new option --only-large

Change-Id: I6bf8372eb387e70cfd25545c21cbc223b88f4b82

testsuite/gnatprove/README.md, after:

Contents
========

This directory contains the testsuite for SPARK 2014.

Requirements
============

Python >= 3.7
e3-testsuite via `pip install` or from
[github](https://github.com/AdaCore/e3-testsuite).

Running the testsuite
=====================

Simply run
```
./run-tests
```

You can add the `--help` switch to see other options.

Test structure
==============

Each subdirectory of `tests` is a separate testcase, the directory name is
equal to the test name.

By default, a test just contains Ada sources and an expected output in the
`test.out` file. In this case, the test driver runs the python function
`prove_all()`, or `do_flow()` if the test directory name contains the `__flow`
substring. Both functions are defined in the helper library in
`lib/python/test_support.py`.  Arguments to this call can be provided via a
`test.yaml` file in the test directory, in the following form:

```
prove_all:
  steps: 100
  prover: ["cvc4"]
  ...
```

The term `prove_all` above must be replaced by `do_flow` in the case of a test
that contains `__flow`. The keys are identical to the named parameters of the
corresponding python functions, see those functions for more information.

This default behavior can be overridden by placing a `test.py` file in the test
directory. In that case the test simply runs that test.py file.
`prove_all/do_flow` entries in the .yaml file are ignored in this case.

The `test.yaml` file can contain a field `large` like this:

```
large: True
```

If set to true, the test is considered "large" and is skipped by default,
unless the `large` discriminant is provided. If omitted, `large` is assumed to
be `False`.
