docs/lrm/source/language-defined-pragmas.rst, before:

.. _language_defined_pragmas:

Language-Defined Pragmas (Annex L)
==================================

Ada Language-Defined Pragmas
----------------------------


The following Ada language-defined pragmas are supported as follows:

============================= ====================== ===============================================
Pragma                        Allowed in SPARK 2014  Comment
============================= ====================== ===============================================
All_Calls_Remote	      No
Assert             	      Yes
Assertion_Policy	      Yes                    No effect on provability (see section "Assertion Pragmas" in the SPARK User's Guide)
Asynchronous       	      No
Atomic          	      Yes
Atomic_Components  	      Yes
Attach_Handler     	      Yes
Convention         	      Yes
CPU             	      Yes
Default_Storage_Pool   	      No		     Restricted access types
Detect_Blocking	  	      Yes
Discard_Names 	  	      No
Dispatching_Domain 	      No		     Ravenscar
Elaborate          	      Yes
Elaborate_All      	      Yes
Elaborate_Body     	      Yes
Export             	      Yes
Import             	      Yes
Independent        	      Yes
Independent_Components 	      Yes
Inline             	      Yes
Inspection_Point   	      Yes
Interrupt_Handler  	      Yes
Interrupt_Priority 	      Yes
Linker_Options     	      Yes
List               	      Yes
Locking_Policy    	      Yes
No_Return          	      Yes
Normalize_Scalars  	      Yes
Optimize           	      Yes
Pack              	      Yes
Page               	      Yes
Partition_Elaboration_Policy  Yes                    Ravenscar
Preelaborable_Initialization  Yes
Preelaborate       	      Yes
Priority  	  	      Yes
Priority_Specific_Dispatching No                     Ravenscar
Profile            	      Yes
Pure               	      Yes
Queuing_Policy 	 	      Yes                    Ravenscar
Relative_Deadline  	      Yes
Remote_Call_Interface 	      No		     Distributed systems
Remote_Types 	 	      No		     Distributed systems
Restrictions 	 	      Yes
Reviewable         	      Yes
Shared_Passive     	      No                     Distributed systems
Storage_Size 	 	      Yes/No                 tasks, not access types
Suppress           	      Yes
Task_Dispatching_Policy       No		     Ravenscar
Unchecked_Union	 	      Yes
Unsuppress 	  	      Yes
Volatile           	      Yes
Volatile_Components 	      Yes
============================= ====================== ===============================================


|SPARK| Language-Defined Pragmas
--------------------------------


The following |SPARK| language-defined pragmas are defined:

============================= ====================== =================================================
Pragma                        Allowed in SPARK 2014  Comment
============================= ====================== =================================================
Abstract_State	 	      Yes
Assert_And_Cut	 	      Yes
Assume		 	      Yes
Async_Readers		      Yes
Async_Writers		      Yes
Constant_After_Elaboration    Yes
Contract_Cases     	      Yes
Default_Initial_Condition     Yes
Depends		 	      Yes
Effective_Reads		      Yes
Effective_Writes	      Yes
Extensions_Visible            Yes
Ghost                         Yes
Global		 	      Yes
Initial_Condition  	      Yes
Initializes	  	      Yes
Loop_Invariant	 	      Yes
Loop_Variant	  	      Yes
No_Caching                    Yes
Part_Of			      Yes
Refined_Depends    	      Yes
Refined_Global	 	      Yes
Refined_Post 	 	      Yes
Refined_State 	 	      Yes
SPARK_Mode         	      Yes                    Language defined but implementation dependent
Unevaluated_Use_Of_Old        Yes
Volatile_Function             Yes
============================= ====================== =================================================

GNAT Implementation-Defined Pragmas
-----------------------------------


The following GNAT implementation-defined pragmas are permitted in |SPARK|:

============================= ====================== =================================================
Pragma                        Allowed in SPARK 2014  Comment
============================= ====================== =================================================
Ada_83			      Yes
Ada_95			      Yes
Ada_05			      Yes
Ada_12             	      Yes
Ada_2005		      Yes
Ada_2012           	      Yes
Ada_2020           	      Yes
Annotate		      Yes
Check	 		      Yes
Check_Policy 		      Yes                    No effect on provability (see section "Assertion Pragmas" in the SPARK User's Guide)
Compile_Time_Error	      Yes		     Ignored (replaced by null statement)
Compile_Time_Warning	      Yes		     Ignored (replaced by null statement)
Debug			      Yes		     Ignored (replaced by null statement)
Default_Scalar_Storage_Order  Yes
Export_Function               Yes
Export_Procedure              Yes
Ignore_Pragma      	      Yes
Inline_Always      	      Yes
Invariant                     Yes
Linker_Section      	      Yes
Max_Queue_Length              Yes                    Extended Ravenscar
No_Elaboration_Code_All       Yes
No_Heap_Finalization          Yes
No_Tagged_Streams             Yes
Overflow_Mode                 Yes
Post		  	      Yes
Postcondition   	      Yes
Post_Class	  	      Yes
Pre		  	      Yes
Precondition	  	      Yes
Pre_Class	  	      Yes
Predicate                     Yes
Predicate_Failure             Yes
Provide_Shift_Operators       Yes
Pure_Function      	      Yes
Restriction_Warnings  	      Yes
Secondary_Stack_Size          Yes
Style_Checks      	      Yes
Test_Case          	      Yes
Type_Invariant                Yes
Type_Invariant_Class          Yes
Unmodified                    Yes
Unreferenced                  Yes
Unused                        Yes
Validity_Checks               Yes
Volatile_Full_Access          Yes
Warnings           	      Yes
Weak_External          	      Yes
============================= ====================== =================================================

Commit message:

T611-002 Ignore pragma/aspect No_Inline in GNATprove
This aspect only has an effect on compilation. In particular it's ignored
for deciding or not to analyze the subprogram contextually.

* docs/lrm/source/language-defined-pragmas.rst
(No_Inline): Now accepted.

* src/flow/flow-control_flow_graph.adb
* src/spark/spark_definition.adb
* src/why/gnat2why-expr.adb
Accept and ignore No_Inline pragma.

* testsuite/gnatprove/tests/T611-002__no-inline/noinline.ads
* testsuite/gnatprove/tests/T611-002__no-inline/test.py
Add test.

Change-Id: Ibf9731846bd15a97c2bd1a8f2f6f8a8d0253aab0

docs/lrm/source/language-defined-pragmas.rst, after:

.. _language_defined_pragmas:

Language-Defined Pragmas (Annex L)
==================================

Ada Language-Defined Pragmas
----------------------------


The following Ada language-defined pragmas are supported as follows:

============================= ====================== ===============================================
Pragma                        Allowed in SPARK 2014  Comment
============================= ====================== ===============================================
All_Calls_Remote	      No
Assert             	      Yes
Assertion_Policy	      Yes                    No effect on provability (see section "Assertion Pragmas" in the SPARK User's Guide)
Asynchronous       	      No
Atomic          	      Yes
Atomic_Components  	      Yes
Attach_Handler     	      Yes
Convention         	      Yes
CPU             	      Yes
Default_Storage_Pool   	      No		     Restricted access types
Detect_Blocking	  	      Yes
Discard_Names 	  	      No
Dispatching_Domain 	      No		     Ravenscar
Elaborate          	      Yes
Elaborate_All      	      Yes
Elaborate_Body     	      Yes
Export             	      Yes
Import             	      Yes
Independent        	      Yes
Independent_Components 	      Yes
Inline             	      Yes
Inspection_Point   	      Yes
Interrupt_Handler  	      Yes
Interrupt_Priority 	      Yes
Linker_Options     	      Yes
List               	      Yes
Locking_Policy    	      Yes
No_Return          	      Yes
Normalize_Scalars  	      Yes
Optimize           	      Yes
Pack              	      Yes
Page               	      Yes
Partition_Elaboration_Policy  Yes                    Ravenscar
Preelaborable_Initialization  Yes
Preelaborate       	      Yes
Priority  	  	      Yes
Priority_Specific_Dispatching No                     Ravenscar
Profile            	      Yes
Pure               	      Yes
Queuing_Policy 	 	      Yes                    Ravenscar
Relative_Deadline  	      Yes
Remote_Call_Interface 	      No		     Distributed systems
Remote_Types 	 	      No		     Distributed systems
Restrictions 	 	      Yes
Reviewable         	      Yes
Shared_Passive     	      No                     Distributed systems
Storage_Size 	 	      Yes/No                 tasks, not access types
Suppress           	      Yes
Task_Dispatching_Policy       No		     Ravenscar
Unchecked_Union	 	      Yes
Unsuppress 	  	      Yes
Volatile           	      Yes
Volatile_Components 	      Yes
============================= ====================== ===============================================


|SPARK| Language-Defined Pragmas
--------------------------------


The following |SPARK| language-defined pragmas are defined:

============================= ====================== =================================================
Pragma                        Allowed in SPARK 2014  Comment
============================= ====================== =================================================
Abstract_State	 	      Yes
Assert_And_Cut	 	      Yes
Assume		 	      Yes
Async_Readers		      Yes
Async_Writers		      Yes
Constant_After_Elaboration    Yes
Contract_Cases     	      Yes
Default_Initial_Condition     Yes
Depends		 	      Yes
Effective_Reads		      Yes
Effective_Writes	      Yes
Extensions_Visible            Yes
Ghost                         Yes
Global		 	      Yes
Initial_Condition  	      Yes
Initializes	  	      Yes
Loop_Invariant	 	      Yes
Loop_Variant	  	      Yes
No_Caching                    Yes
Part_Of			      Yes
Refined_Depends    	      Yes
Refined_Global	 	      Yes
Refined_Post 	 	      Yes
Refined_State 	 	      Yes
SPARK_Mode         	      Yes                    Language defined but implementation dependent
Unevaluated_Use_Of_Old        Yes
Volatile_Function             Yes
============================= ====================== =================================================

GNAT Implementation-Defined Pragmas
-----------------------------------


The following GNAT implementation-defined pragmas are permitted in |SPARK|:

============================= ====================== =================================================
Pragma                        Allowed in SPARK 2014  Comment
============================= ====================== =================================================
Ada_83			      Yes
Ada_95			      Yes
Ada_05			      Yes
Ada_12             	      Yes
Ada_2005		      Yes
Ada_2012           	      Yes
Ada_2020           	      Yes
Annotate		      Yes
Check	 		      Yes
Check_Policy 		      Yes                    No effect on provability (see section "Assertion Pragmas" in the SPARK User's Guide)
Compile_Time_Error	      Yes		     Ignored (replaced by null statement)
Compile_Time_Warning	      Yes		     Ignored (replaced by null statement)
Debug			      Yes		     Ignored (replaced by null statement)
Default_Scalar_Storage_Order  Yes
Export_Function               Yes
Export_Procedure              Yes
Ignore_Pragma      	      Yes
Inline_Always      	      Yes
Invariant                     Yes
Linker_Section      	      Yes
Max_Queue_Length              Yes                    Extended Ravenscar
No_Elaboration_Code_All       Yes
No_Heap_Finalization          Yes
No_Inline                     Yes                    No effect on contextual analysis of subprograms
No_Tagged_Streams             Yes
Overflow_Mode                 Yes
Post		  	      Yes
Postcondition   	      Yes
Post_Class	  	      Yes
Pre		  	      Yes
Precondition	  	      Yes
Pre_Class	  	      Yes
Predicate                     Yes
Predicate_Failure             Yes
Provide_Shift_Operators       Yes
Pure_Function      	      Yes
Restriction_Warnings  	      Yes
Secondary_Stack_Size          Yes
Style_Checks      	      Yes
Test_Case          	      Yes
Type_Invariant                Yes
Type_Invariant_Class          Yes
Unmodified                    Yes
Unreferenced                  Yes
Unused                        Yes
Validity_Checks               Yes
Volatile_Full_Access          Yes
Warnings           	      Yes
Weak_External          	      Yes
============================= ====================== =================================================
