Introduction
============

|SPARK| is a programming language and a set of verification tools
designed to meet the needs of high-assurance software development.
|SPARK| is based on Ada 2012, both subsetting the language to remove
features that defy verification, but also extending the system of
contracts and "aspects" to support modular, formal verification.

|SPARK| is a much larger and more flexible language than its
predecessor SPARK 2005. The language can be configured to suit
a number of application domains and standards, from server-class
high-assurance systems (such as air-traffic management applications),
to embedded, hard real-time, critical systems (such as avionic
systems complying with DO-178C Level A).

How to Read this Manual
-----------------------

This language reference manual is *not* a tutorial guide
to |SPARK|.  It is intended as a reference guide for
users and implementors of the language.  In this context
"implementors" includes those producing both compilers and
verification tools.

This manual is written in the style and language of the Ada 2012 Reference Manual (RM),
so knowledge of Ada 2012 is assumed.  Chapters 2 through 13 mirror
the structure of the Ada 2012 RM.  Chapter 14 covers all the annexes
of the Ada RM.

Readers interested in how SPARK 2005 constructs and idioms map into
|SPARK| should consult the appendix :ref:`mapping-spec-label`.

|SPARK| Design Goals
--------------------

Principal design goals are as follows:

- Provision of "formal analysis" as defined by DO-333, which states
  "an analysis method can only be regarded as formal analysis
  if its determination of property is sound. Sound analysis means
  that the method never asserts a property to be true when it is not true."

- The language design shall support the case for soundness of analysis.
  Language features that defy sound analysis will be eliminated or their
  use constrained to meet this goal.

- The language shall offer an *unambiguous* semantics. In Ada terminology,
  this means that all erroneous and unspecified behaviour shall
  be eliminated. Implementation-defined features will be automatically
  determined for projects using GNAT, or will be configurable (where
  possible) or rejected for other compilers.

- The |SPARK| language subset shall embody the largest subset of Ada 2012 that is
  currently amenable to formal verification, in line with the goals above, although
  future advances in verification research and computing power may allow
  for expansion of the language and the forms of verification available.

- |SPARK| shall provide for both constructive and retrospective modes of
  verification.

- |SPARK| shall provide for mixing of verification evidence generated
  by formal analysis, for code written in the |SPARK| subset, and
  evidence generated by testing or other traditional means, for
  code written outside of the core |SPARK| language, including
  legacy Ada code, or code written in the |SPARK| subset for which
  verification evidence could not be generated.

Profiles and Analyses
---------------------

In addition to the core |SPARK| language subset, the language
may define a number of *Profiles* which are designed to meet
the needs of particular

- Application domains - for example, server-class air-traffic management systems,

- Standards - for example, DO-178C Level A,

- Technical requirements - for example, systems requiring software that is
  compatible with a "zero footprint" run-time library.

|SPARK| will be amenable to a range of formal analyses, including but not limited to:

- Data-flow analysis.

- Information-flow analysis and program slicing.

- Formal verification of robustness properties. In Ada terminology, this refers to
  the proof that a predefined check will never fail at run time, and hence predefined
  exceptions will never be raised.

- Formal verification of functional properties, based on contracts expressed as
  preconditions, postconditions, type invariants and so on.

- Formal verification of non-functional properties, such as WCET and
  worst-case memory usage analysis.

Principal Language Restrictions
-------------------------------

To facilitate formal verification, |SPARK| enforces a number of global
simplifications to Ada 2012. While these are covered in more detail
in the remaining chapters of this document, the most notable simplifications are:

- The use of access types and allocators is not permitted.

- All expressions (including function calls) are free of side-effects.

- Aliasing of names is not permitted.

- The goto statement is not permitted.

- The use of controlled types is not permitted.

- Tasking is not currently permitted.

- Raising and handling of exceptions is not permitted.

We describe a program unit or language feature as being "in |SPARK|"
if it complies with the restrictions required to permit formal
verification.  Conversely, a program unit language feature is "not in
|SPARK|" if it does not meet these requirements, and so is not
amenable to formal verification. Within a single unit, features which
are "in" and "not in" |SPARK| may be mixed at a fine level. For
example, the following combinations may be typical:

- Package specification in |SPARK|. Package body entirely not in |SPARK|.

- Visible part of package specification in |SPARK|. Private part and body not in |SPARK|.

- Package specification in |SPARK|. Package body almost entirely in |SPARK|, with a small
  number of subprogram bodies not in |SPARK|.

- Package specification in |SPARK|, with all bodies imported from another language.

- Package specification contains a mixture of declarations which are in |SPARK| and not in |SPARK|.
  The latter declarations are only visible and usable from client units which are not in |SPARK|.

Such patterns are intended to allow for mixed-language programming, and the development of programs
that mix formal verification and more traditional testing.

Static Checking
---------------

The static checking needed to determine whether a |SPARK|
program is suitable for execution is performed in three separate
phases. Errors may be detected during any of these three steps.

First, a compilation unit must compile successfully. In addition
to enforcing all of Ada's legality rules, |SPARK| imposes
additional restrictions (e.g., no uses of the reserved word
**access**). These additional restrictions are
described in sections with the heading "Extended Legality Rules".
A compilation unit might be fully in |SPARK|, partially in |SPARK|, or
not in |SPARK|, as instructed by the user, which sometimes determines
whether the compiler accepts it or not (e.g., a unit fully in |SPARK|
cannot use access types, while a unit partially in |SPARK| might).

Next, flow analysis is performed. For example, checks are performed that
the reads of and writes to global variables by a subprogram match the
behavior specified for the subprogram. Rules which are enforced at this
point are described in sections with the heading "Verification Rules"
and a subheading of "Checked by Flow Analysis".

.. note::
 (SB) this is silly - the heading should be "Flow Analysis Rules".
 The point is that there are no non-flow-analysis verification rules
 anymore. Everything else follows from the one rule that a run-time
 check induces a proof obligation. If we had ghost variables or
 prover-hints or something like that, then we might need
 "Verification Rules" sections. But we don't, so we don't.

.. note::
 (YM) I mostly agree with Steve... except for the possible case of
 type invariants. I don't know what's the status of type invariants in Ada
 2012, as there were some discussions not long ago that did not reach a
 final conclusion. The issue is whether type invariants are enforced at
 subprogram entry on IN parameters, or not. If it's not the case in Ada, we
 will still want to enforce this verification in SPARK, at least at the proof
 level. And, notewithstanding this issue, we will probably need to decide
 what to enforce for global variables read/written, and Ada RM does not say
 anything about this. Shouldn't this be under the "Proof Rules" or
 "Formal Verification Rules"?

Finally, formal program verification is performed.

Many Ada constructs have dynamic semantics which include a requirement
that some error condition must (or, in the cases of some bounded errors,
may) be checked, and some exception must (or, in the case of a bounded
error, may) be raised, if the error is detected (see Ada RM 1.1.5(5-8)). For
example, evaluating the name of an array component includes a check that
each index value belongs to the corresponding index range of the array
(see Ada RM 4.1.1(7)).

For every such run-time check (including bounded errors) a corresponding
obligation to prove that the error condition cannot be true is introduced.
In particular, this rule applies to the run-time checks associated with any
assertion (see Ada 2012 RM (11.4.2)); the one exception to this rule is pragma
``Assume`` (see :ref:`pragma_assume`).

In addition, the generation of proof obligations is unaffected by the
suppression of checks (e.g., via pragma ``Suppress``) or the disabling of
assertions (e.g., via pragma ``Assertion_Policy``). In other words, suppressing
or disabling a check does not prevent generation of its associated proof
obligations.

All such generated proof obligations must be discharged before the
formal program verification phase may be considered to be complete.

Every valid |SPARK| program is also a valid Ada 2012 program.
The dynamic semantics of the two languages are defined to be identical,
so that a valid |SPARK| program may be compiled and executed by means of
an Ada compiler.

Many invalid |SPARK| programs are also valid Ada 2012 programs.
An incorrect |SPARK| program with, say, inconsistent dataflow
annotations or undischarged proof obligations can still be executed as
long as the Ada compiler in question finds nothing objectionable. What one
gives up in this case is the formal proof of the absence of run-time errors,
the static checking of dataflow dependencies, and the formal proof that
the program implements its specifications (contracts and invariants).

There is an important caveat that must accompany the assertion that
|SPARK| is, in the sense described above, a subset of Ada 2012. |SPARK|
makes use of certain aspects, attributes, and pragmas that are not
defined in the Ada 2012 reference manual. Ada 2012 explicitly permits
implementations to provide implementation-defined aspects, attributes,
and pragmas. Whenever the |SPARK| manual defines an aspect (e.g.,
``Contract_Cases``), an attribute (e.g., ``Update``), or a pragma (e.g., ``Loop_Variant``),
this implies that a |SPARK| program which makes use of this
construct can only be compiled and executed by an
Ada implementation which supports this construct in a way that is
consistent with the definition given here in the |SPARK| reference manual.
The GNAT Pro Ada 2012 implementation is one such implementation.
The dynamic semantics of any construct other than these implementation-defined
attributes, aspects, and pragmas are defined to be as defined in the
Ada 2012 reference manual.

.. note::
 (SB) Need wording here to deal with the case where, to avoid duplication,
 the attribute/aspect/pragma definition occurs only in the GNAT RM.
 We have this situation already with Valid_Scalars attribute and more
 is on the way.

.. note::
 (SB) We could discuss other, more subtle cases in which SPARK
 is GNAT-dependent (e.g., intermediate overflow; elaboration order).
 That level of detail is probably inappropriate here.

Optional Restrictions and Profiles
----------------------------------

In addition to the global simplifications of the language given above, |SPARK|
defines a number of Restrictions that may be optionally applied to an entire
project, program or unit. These restrictions may provide additional simplification
of the language that users feel necessary, may meet particular demands of standards
or coding guidelines, and may facilitate additional forms of verification, or
may improve the level of automation achievable with existing analyses.

A *Profile* is a set of such Restrictions.

Constructive and Retrospective Verification Modes
-------------------------------------------------

SPARK 2005 strongly favoured the *constructive* verification style - where all
program units required contracts on their specifications.  These
contracts had to be designed and added at an early stage to assist modular
verification, and then maintained by the user as a program evolved.

In contrast, |SPARK| is designed to facilitate a more *retrospective* mode of
program construction and verification, where useful forms of verification can
be achieved with code that complies with the core |SPARK| restrictions, but
otherwise does not have any contracts.  In this mode, implicit contracts can be
computed from the bodies of units, and then used in the analysis of other
units, and so on.  These implicit contracts can be "promoted" by the user to
become part of the specification of a unit, allowing the designer to move from
the retrospective to the constructive mode as a project matures.  The
retrospective mode also allows for the verification of legacy code that was not
originally designed with the |SPARK| contracts in mind.

Combining Formal Verification and Testing
-----------------------------------------

There are common reasons for combining formal verification on some part
of a codebase and testing on the rest of the codebase:

#. Formal verification is only applicable to a part of the codebase. For
   example, it might not be possible to apply formal verification to Ada code
   that is not in |SPARK|.

#. Formal verification only gives strong enough results on a part of the
   codebase. This might be because the desired properties cannot be expressed
   formally, or because proof of these desired properties cannot be
   sufficiently automated.

#. Formal verification is only cost-effective on a part of the codebase. (And
   it may be more cost-effective than testing on this part of the codebase.)

For all these reasons, it is important to be able to combine the results of
formal verification and testing on different parts of a codebase.

Contracts on subprograms provide a natural boundary for this combination. If a
subprogram is proved to respect its contract, it should be possible to call it
from a tested subprogram. Conversely, formal verification of a subprogram
(including absence of run-time errors and contract checking) depends on called
subprograms respecting their own contracts, whether these are verified by
formal verification or testing.

Formal verification works by making some assumptions, and these assumptions
should be shown to hold even when formal verification and testing are
combined. Certainly, formal verification cannot guarantee the same
properties when part of a program is only tested, as when all of a program is
proved. The goal then, when combining formal verification and testing, is to
reach a level of confidence as good as the level reached by testing alone.

Any toolset that proposes a combination of formal verification and testing for
|SPARK| should provide a detailed process for doing so, including any necessary
additional testing of proof assumptions.

Method of Description and Syntax Notation
-----------------------------------------

In expressing the syntax and rules of |SPARK|, the remaining chapters of
this document follow the notational conventions of the Ada 2012 RM (section 1.1.4).

